The Common Fund is a funding entity within NIH that supports bold scientific programs that catalyze discovery across all biomedical and behavioral research. Common Fund programs generate diverse and valuable data sets and knowledge designed to be used by the research community. However, these datasets are found in different locations and repositories, which makes the use of data across CF programs difficult. Thus, the Common Fund Data Ecosystem (CFDE)  is an initiative that aims to enable broad use of  Common Fund data made available by the CF Data Coordinating Centers (DCCs) to accelerate biomedical scientific discovery [1]. 

<br />

To illustrate how G2SG can be used to discover novel hypotheses through cross DCC analysis, we propose a use case where we cross the aging signatures created from GTEx [2]with the MoTrPAC Rat Endurance Training [3] gene sets to investigate the common biological underpinnings that accompany both aging and exercise.

<br />

The CFDE GMT crossing feature allows users to cross the GMT files generated by Common Fund DCCs in order to find gene set pairs from the different GMTs that have a significant number of overlapping genes. The overlapping genes between each pair can be sent to Enrichr [4] for enrichment analysis or to a GPT-4 model [5] to generate a hypothesis about the potential reason for overlap between the gene sets that make up the crossed gene set pair. To create the GPT-4 generated hypothesis, we give GPT-4 a textual description of each gene set in the crossed pair, the overlapping genes, the enriched terms from Enrichr using the GO Biological Processes[6], WikiPathway 2023 Human [7], MGI Mammalian Phenotype Level 4 [8] , and GWAS Catalog 2023 [9] libraries as backgrounds, and then ask it to compose an abstract that describes the potential connection between these gene sets. 

<br />

The top two crossing pairs of the GTEx Aging Signatures and MoTrPAC Rat Endurance Training GMTs (GTEx Blood 20-29 vs 60-69 Up ∩ T30-Blood-Rna Female 2W Down and GTEx Blood 20-29 vs 70-79 Up ∩ T30-Blood-Rna Female 2W Down) have 35 and 26 overlapping genes respectively. In performing enrichment analysis on the overlapping genes of these pairs by sending them to Enrichr, we find that the overlapping genes are enriched for pathways are related to immune response, blood coagulation, metabolism and lipid metabolism, which are all processes that can be affected by both aging and physical activity. 

<br />

The GPT-4 generated hypothesis further explains the possible ways that these overlapping genes are tied to the physiological changes that accompany both aging and exercise through these enriched pathways. It proposes that the high overlap between the two gene sets could be due to the shared influence of aging and physical activity on these biological pathways and processes in opposing ways. Several of the overlapping genes such as FGA, FGB, and FGG are related to blood homeostasis and coagulation and while some others are involved in glyoxylate and lipid metabolism. The GPT-4 generated hypothesis posits that the overlap is because “Aging is associated with changes in lipid metabolism and increased risk of cardiovascular diseases, while regular physical activity can improve lipid profile and reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases. Aging can lead to changes in blood coagulation, and physical activity is known to influence blood viscosity and coagulation.”

<br />

**REFERENCES**

- [1]	“Common Fund Data Ecosystem (CFDE).” Accessed: Apr. 18, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://commonfund.nih.gov/dataecosystem
- [2]	K. Jia, C. Cui, Y. Gao, Y. Zhou, and Q. Cui, “An analysis of aging-related genes derived from the Genotype-Tissue Expression project (GTEx),” Cell Death Discov, vol. 4, p. 26, Aug. 2018.
- [3]	S. Schenk et al., “Physiological Adaptations to Progressive Endurance Exercise Training in Adult And Aged Rats: Insights from The Molecular Transducers of Physical Activity Consortium (MoTrPAC),” Function, doi: 10.1093/function/zqae014.
- [4]	E. Y. Chen et al., “Enrichr: interactive and collaborative HTML5 gene list enrichment analysis tool,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 14, p. 128, Apr. 2013.
- [5]	OpenAI et al., “GPT-4 Technical Report,” arXiv [cs.CL], Mar. 15, 2023. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774
- [6]	Gene Ontology Consortium, “Gene Ontology Consortium: going forward,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 43, no. Database issue, pp. D1049–56, Jan. 2015.
- [7]	M. Kutmon et al., “WikiPathways: capturing the full diversity of pathway knowledge,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 44, no. D1, pp. D488–94, Jan. 2016.
- [8]	J. A. Blake, C. J. Bult, J. T. Eppig, J. A. Kadin, J. E. Richardson, and Mouse Genome Database Group, “The Mouse Genome Database genotypes::phenotypes,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 37, no. Database issue, pp. D712–9, Jan. 2009.
- [9]	E. Sollis et al., “The NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog: knowledgebase and deposition resource,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 51, no. D1, pp. D977–D985, Jan. 2023.